It's great to have you here. You are the third of our-
Yep
... Gen Tailers in front of us, so we look forward to the conversation.
Can I just ask colleagues if we can, when we're asking questions, can we ask
questions, not speeches?
I will jump on you for that if they get too long because I know there'll be lots of
questions that people want to ask, and that swallows up other people's time.
But what we will do is hand over to you to do the
intros and to
say what you want to say to start with for five minutes or so, and then we'll go to
questions.
Thank-
I know there will be plenty.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I've got all afternoon.
And we are aware that there's something else on today as well, obviously.
Oh, but this is important.
Yes, it is. Absolutely.
Tena koutou katoa. I'm Mark Verbeest.
I'm the chair of Meridian Energy, and I've got with me Mike
Rowan, who's our
CEO. We will keep it
brief because we genuinely do want you to get through your questions, and
hopefully we can answer them all to your
satisfaction.
You'll be aware we're the largest electricity generator, and we
remain committed
to generating electricity only from renewable sources.
We own and operate seven hydro stations, six on the Waitaki,
one in Manapouri, eight wind farms and a grid scale factory,
and of course, we're building some more.
We also service roughly 460,000 customers
presently through two brands, Meridian and Powershop.
We know we've got a significant role to play in helping Kiwis power their
homes and businesses to reduce
overall energy costs and in growing
and decarbonizing the economy.
And I want to assure the committee that we do take these
responsibilities seriously. Our people are very committed
and proud of the company and its assets, and rightly
so. We were quite recently
recognized by Standard and Poor's Global Dow Jones
Best in Class as a global reference point for renewable
energy.
We're actually the only New Zealand company in the world
index and one of only 16
energy companies globally that is in this
index in the top 10.
And that is around measuring sustainability in all its forms.
It's environmental, it's governance related, it's also social,
and that relates to how we treat our customers and how we
treat our staff.
We know our work benefits New Zealand more
broadly. Around 80 cents in every dollar we pay in
dividends to the government,
which is $0.54 goes directly to the government
in dividends and another $0.25
goes into KiwiSaver funds invested.
We're also, obviously, one of New Zealand's largest
taxpayers, and when you take into account tax, around two-thirds
of every dollar we make goes to the government in
either dividends or tax.
Financial year '25 was very challenging for us,
reflecting the cost of maintaining
system security through winter 2024, where we had
low hydrology,
much more reduced gas availability.
And our balance sheet is strong enough, and we maintain it
in a strong enough position so that we can actually
respond.
I would say our results in FY25 show in stark
form that we do not benefit from high wholesale prices
at Meridian.
We understand the importance of balancing the
expectations of customers, shareholders and you, our
policymakers and regulators.
And
I would say that,
being Murphy's Law, we bought expensive hedging through that
period, which cost us dearly,
because not long after we'd done that, it rained.
So,
we're pretty quickly out of the money.
But the point is that we do these things because we're
conscious of particularly our customer stakeholders and
smoothing responses for them.
So look, I'll leave it there for me, and I'll quickly hand over to
Mike.
Thanks, mate.
And then happy to answer your questions.
Thank you. Yeah. Ngā mihi, Mark, and tena koutou.
The
New Zealand economy is working its way through what's a pretty material structural
adjustment driven by the collapse of gas production
that we've used for any number of years, many probably 40, 50
years, to provide abundant, affordable fuel for direct
consumers of gas and for the electricity sector.
And the pricing impact
of the collapse has been and remains incredibly challenging for
everybody because it affects all gas users and our
electricity customers. It's going to take years to overcomeAnd there are
no silver bullets that we can see that are
available to solve it. So, the first thing I want to acknowledge is
the pain that people are facing.
New Zealanders want more affordable electricity, so do we.
And I want to assure people that we're doing everything that we can to
mitigate the impact of this structural issue,
but it will take time to overcome. So, the
best way of doing this, of course, is to continue to invest in renewable
generation and the firming and flexibility that supports it.
And over the last five years, Merian's invested more than a billion dollars in
new generation, and we have a further two billion planned
over the next three. We're not alone in this.
You would have heard from the others, as you mentioned, Chair, that across the
sector, new generation's being delivered at rates that are
setting historical precedents.
We're scaling faster than any time in New Zealand's history.
And the investment coupled with firming solutions like Meridian's
grid-scale battery at Ruakaka, the Huntly Strategic Energy Reserve, and
the demand response agreement that we've got with Rio Tinto,
and the aluminum smelter at Tiwai Point, means that the electricity
sector has secured sufficient dry year insurance for the next decade.
As you'd expect, the investments that we're making, the scale of that investment's
put downward pressure on forward electricity prices.
They've moved pretty quickly. Since January this year, the cost of electricity is
reflected by the market traders' future electricity
prices for calendar years '27, '28, and
'29 have dropped by over 25%.
So they've come off materially. In fact, they've fallen so far that
over that time that the prices at Benmore are now in line with
our internal fundamental forecast, sitting around $120
a megawatt hour. That said, they remain above the 70 to
80 bucks per megawatt hour that we have enjoyed
historically, and for the foreseeable future,
we believe that they'll remain at that level, so the $120 per
megawatt hour. And we can explain that if you're interested.
So-
I think we will ask that trajectory, so yeah.
Yeah.
So while building new generation's the best thing that we can do, there's more that
we have to do, and
we've invested in new technology to underpin products and services for our retail
team to help manage costs for customers, and we're committed
to our most vulnerable customers.
We talked to this last year, but we offer an energy wellbeing program that
we've spent over 3 million bucks on supporting
4,000 of our most vulnerable customers.
Everything from household assessments, curtains, insulation, heat
pumps, practical stuff that helps
homes. And as Mark said, we recognize the
sector enables the wider economy, and that's why the issues that I mentioned to
start with are so damn frustrating and challenging
for everybody.
We do have one of the most renewable and secure electricity systems in the
world, so we do have what we would frame as a longer term
competitive advantage, which is good.
And while prices are higher than we'd like, it's important to recognize that New
Zealand currently ranks among the top 10
countries in the World Energy Council ratings for affordability.
So other countries are really struggling with similar
challenges. We've also got more retailers per capita than you see in
Australia and the UK, so levels of competition here
are pretty sound, and we've got a market that works pretty
damn well in our view. So in closing, I'd say the same thing that
Mark did, is I want to acknowledge the efforts of people within our team that every
day go out there and support customers, and are trying to tackle and overcome the
structural challenge that I mentioned.
And I'm confident will prevail in time.
But I'll leave it there because as Chair said, I know you've got plenty of
questions.
We have. Okay. I'm going to start with Carlos-
Yes
... then Megan, then Joseph, and
yeah, we've been slow there. And then Simon, and then Scott.
And then Tangi.
Okay. And we'll take about... And then Tangi. Okay. Right. Tangi, get ready.
You should give him-
Yeah
... and then I might ask some too. So we'll go around, but if we can have about
up to four questions each, and then you get another crack. So there you go, Carlos.
Yeah. So
it's great to hear that you understand people are struggling, and also you've been
mentioned that we are, New Zealand, are one of the top 10 country in
affordable energy. But in your own terms, how do you define
affordable electricity for ordinary households today?
And do you believe your current price meet the standard?
When I talk to affordability, it's a relative measure.
So, we think about that affordability challenge from an
exporter perspective. So how does New Zealand support those who export
and compete with companies that might be
situated or located in Australia,
the UK, the US, Asia? So when I talk to the
World Energy Council ratings, I'm really talking about
New Zealand remains affordable from a competitive
perspective with those economies.
We know that people want cheaper electricity.
There's no question about it. The costs of electricity have gone up
as a result of
gas, and we're not comfortable with the prices that we have
seen, so we're comforted by the levels that prices
have fallen to, wholesale prices that I mentioned, back to
120 bucks a megawatt hour, and we know that they are the
competitive levels that you'll see.
So,
from an affordability perspective, our job is to bring those
prices back to that level.
But do you think it's affordable?
For those
where it's not affordable, because there are people in our society
that simply electricity is challenging,
is that's where we bring our vulnerable customer
program into play.
So
for some people, it really does challenge them
in going about their daily lives, and that's why we run that program.
So firstly, how can you justify the profit level while many households
are struggling to afford electricity?
So this is one of the challenges that we
have as a company. Obviously, as a business,
you're only able to stay in business to the extent you're sustainable, and you must
maintain
profitability, otherwise you can't help customers, stakeholders, or
anybody. So, our profitability is
actually important.
We are aware that our profitability has...
Well, it took a massive hit last year as a
result of the conditions that played out.
But as we restore to more normal levels, we do
understand that people look at our profitability and question it.
But
what I, again, when you look at the headline numbers, are large
because we're a large business, is our rate of return
in terms of profitability is really reasonable.
It's mid-range single digits, so
I'm talking our return on equity is around 5%.
Oh, it's just under.
So we have to manage a trilemma of stakeholders, as I
mentioned briefly before.
Mm-hmm.
And we are using shareholders' capital in order to invest,
so we have to satisfy them. We're also conscious of
satisfying customers,
and it's actually not in our interest to have customers going broke
or disappearing. Quite the contrary.
We wouldn't have a sustainable business either.
So
that's the balance that we have to maintain.
When you're talking about households, the thing we tend to concentrate on is what
is the proportion of someone's income that is being spent
on energy. And I think if you looked at that over time, it's actually come down.
And related to that, the only additional thing that I would say is just
remember,
whilst we pass through
the lines costs,
we don't control that, and that's regulated.
So we can deal with the bits that we deal with, which is retail and the
generation margin.
So can you-
Last question.
Sorry. So if it's last question, all right.
What would you say to working families in my school, in my
electorate, who do not qualify for all the support from your
company but still struggle to pay their power bills every month?
Well, I would say get in contact with us.
But they do not qualify to your power support.
So what are you going to say with those hard-working families in my school?
We
pride ourselves, every customer that we have that has
challenges is we work with everybody.
So that's why I say I'd encourage them to get in touch.
If you've got families in your electorate that are
really struggling, get them to talk to us about the challenges that they're
facing so that we can make sure that they are
supported by us.
Good. Megan.
Thank you, and thank you for your presentation.
First line of questioning I want to go on is around Pukaki.
Probably no great surprise. In your written answers to the committee,
you say that greater access to the contingent hydro resources which sit
at the bottom of several South Island lakes would immediately
reduce wholesale prices, provide a further buffer against dry
year risk, and improve system efficiency and emissions outcomes.
So how central is to changing the rules for
contingent storage at Pukaki to your strategy over the next decade,
if you weigh that against investment and storage, demand
response and new generation, and how will it impact on those things?
We think it's really important for the country to have
firming
resources available. And of course, hydro reservoirs
are fantastic at providing firming, and particularly
as our gas reservoirs that are also reasonably flexible
for the production and levels fall.
That's why we put the contingent storage
to the fast track panel is,
that firming ability of contingent storage will be
important for the country.
But you also picked up that
right here, right now, and going back to the previous questions, Kiwis
are finding
the challenges with the cost of energy.
And we know that if you release that contingent storage, it will bring
energy prices down.
So the immediacy is driven
by a reduction in wholesale prices, which
will then flow through to retail prices over time.
But in the long term, the country needs more firming
resource, and that's what contingent storage provides.
So in your report, I think it is, that you estimate that
$437 million of savings a year,
how is this going to be passed through to households who are on
fixed price contracts? Because as the EA and
Transpower have pointed out, that that doesn't
necessarily equate that that will flow through to households.
And what proportion of your book is hedged already
and won't be seeing those three year downward pressures on prices that you're
talking about? Where's the $437 million going to land?
Yep. So it does take timeSo it does take time to
filter through. Because there are two sorts of customers.
One is the commercial customers that they might run a one, two,
three-year contract. As they come off contract, those contracts are then
set against wholesale rates at the time that they enter into the contracts.
And if wholesale prices are lower, they will get that benefit
immediately when they re-contract.
Say we were successful in
realizing contingent storage release, as commercial
customers coming off contract, the next day would
see that benefit. For residential customers,
your point is the next time that we look at pricing for
residential customers will be next April.
And of course, if wholesale prices come off, then
residential customers benefit from that
when we look at those reviews.
So in reality, households and businesses are not going to
see downward pressure, not going to see a reduction in their power
prices from this for quite some time.
They will absolutely see it.
But it does depend on the length of contract that they're currently on.
So the $437 million figure is accurate, but
your point is, when does that flow through to customers?
It will flow through in its entirety as we
reprice residential customers and commercial contracts coming off.
Sure. But it could take up to three years for some hedge businesses.
It could take time. Yep.
So one of the things that your fast track application does is it
effectively shifts 10% of the nation's storage,
which is an incredibly valuable bit of our electricity network,
from Transpower being the decision-maker to Meridian being
the decision-maker around when to release this.
So what guardrails are you going to put in place in
terms of the governance of that, so that this is operated in New Zealand's
best interest and not in Meridian's best interest?
Yep. When you look at 2024,
as Mark said, the party that was
exposed and saw a massive cost as a result
of the gas market
being challenged, as well as the hydro drought, was Meridian.
And Mercury.
Yep. So we
operate those lakes
very, very conservatively and prudently.
If anyone looked at how we operate them, they're operated more
conservatively than ECNZ operated them.
The proof is there. And we
operate them more conservatively now than we did when we
had both the Tekapo scheme and the remaining Waitaki
scheme.
So
I know that we operate those facilities
in a very prudent way
to manage both the risks of security, while
making sure that consumers realize that benefit that we just talked
to. As we are
ultimately the ones that are exposed to dry year
risk, and therefore, we treat this resource and its use
very seriously.
So, I absolutely understand that, and there's
no doubt that 2024 was an incredibly hard year for Meridian.
But it was an incredibly hard year for the country.
It was.
And we saw many businesses go to the wall.
So our job as a parliament is to ensure that this
asset is run in the best interest of New Zealand, not the Meridian
balance sheet.
Agreed.
To ensure that we are delivering those lower power prices.
Now, there's a number of people have put up an
argument that actually this could drive up our prices,
where we get the perfect storm,
that we have a dry year and an outage in the North Island of a
major asset, that we have used our last line of defense
at that point, and that we could see higher wholesale
spikes on the spot market.
Yep.
What is going to be put in place to protect New Zealand businesses from that being
the case, and what governance arrangements will Meridian put in place?
What we know, because we've seen
the analysis and we've talked to everybody who's participated in that process, and
we know that on average, there are benefits to Kiwis.
We put the numbers at about $400 million.
Transpower puts them at about $40 million.
And that the Electricity Authority, who has jurisdiction in this space, has
looked at our analysis, Transpower's analysis, and gone, "On
balance,
Meridian is right that consumers will benefit." Even
though there are sequences that are quite difficult
for people, our regulator has looked at this challenge
and said, "It is better to release contingent storage than
to save it for the perfect storm," because the probability of that
perfect storm playing out is incredibly low, even
though it could happen. And that would mean
consumers would miss the entirety of the benefit while we waited for that
perfect storm. And so on balance, everybody says,
"Let's release the storage to market so that Kiwis who are struggling right now
get the benefit of that water," because we know that water's cheap.
But we know that benefit is going to take some time to flow through, and we know
that while the regulator has said this, that the system operator-
Yep
... Transpower, has raised some concerns-
... around the upward pressure on price this arrangement
could have. So I think what would be really useful for the committee
is before that fast track decision is made,
whether all of Meridian's analysis around that could be released to the
committee so that we could look at that.
Is there anything in particular that you'd like to see?
Because we-
So, yes. So what would happen in a scenario
where we have dry year or cumulative dry years-
Yep
... coupled potentially with an outage in the North Island?
Yeah. What are your concerns there?
So this is the scenario that Transpower is raising.
Yeah, so you'd like to see the-
Any modeling that you've done around what the-
You've got the sensitivity sure that-
... price impact would be.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah.
Thank you.
No, that's-
I think on that we would ask some follow-up questions, certainly.
Yeah, of course.
The flow-through benefit-
Yeah
... from lower wholesale prices, that we want to understand how that's going to
flow through, because everybody says the expectations come down.
Yep.
We want to start seeing notices saying your bill is coming down.
That's a wonderful thing.
And when. Timeline.
And, yeah, and timelines.
Yeah.
I'm going to go to Simon as a sup on that, just one sup, and then I'm going to
Joseph, so that Joseph can then go and fare thee to the place. Well, Katie.
Yeah. Thanks. I'm just interested in your fast track application
for lowering Pukaki. You talk about needing to do it
in order to do some rock armoring and some other engineering protection works in
the event that you do end up taking it to that low level.
Will that involve draining the lake?
So, the reason that we need to
armor that dam face is when it was originally built, it was
originally built to operate from 518 meters
and up to 532, and the use of contingent storage would take
it down to 513 meters possibly. The armoring
of that 518 to 513 range,
the rocks just aren't there.
Okay.
And so what we've worked out, because we
know that with droughts you could actually fall below the
518 range. So right now,
under specific circumstances, we can use that contingent
storage range.
What we need to ensure is that the dam structure retains its
integrity. So we've got a process that we can
use to, as the lake falls, and it falls largely
because of a drought. It's not that the water's going into,
the Pukaki
Canal, it's just that it's not raining.
But we know that if we need to make electricity to keep the lights on
in the country, that we need to armor that face.
Okay.
And so what we would do is diggers would
enter the
current rock that sits on the dam face, and they would
start placing rock at the lower reaches that weren't
armored.
Okay.
So.
Would it make more sense from an engineering project management point of
view to program that by making sure that the lake is
low enough and do it all at once? Or is this something you're just going to do
piecemeal depending on whether it rains or not?
You can't.
That's the-
We, we-
Yeah, yeah. Got you all. Yeah.
It's really tricky, so we've looked at all sorts of ways to do it.
Yeah.
It's really tricky to do it when the lake level is
above.
Well, of course. But I don't think-
Yeah, yeah. Si-
So, well
we'll let Joseph have the last say.
I think you've got a pinch. Right. Joseph, and then I go to Simon.
Oh, thank you very much, Chair, and, thank you very much for being here.
It's a pure chance on here, actually, just having you cover a colleague, but I'm
very pleased I am because this is a bit of a passion topic for me.
Manapouri's been my electric, been there twice.
And White Hills Power wind farms. Also haven't been there yet, but I'm
keen to. But look,
on a first principles basis, I'm really interested in your thoughts about what we
should do because renewable generation in this country is great, but it's only
55 to 60% of our generation.
We have a maximum of three months of hydro storage all going well, provided
every other energy source holds up that we have for that other 40-plus
percent of energy generation.
That's one of the lowest rates in comparable countries in the world.
Tasmania, for example, has more than 12 months of hydro storage, and they rely
on the Basslink interconnector to Australia, and they had to rely on that back in
2024. And of course, in 2024, because they had dropping gas suppliers,
central gas suppliers, prices peaked to $850 a megawatt
unit.
Since then, I think it's dropped, was it 27% last year? 23%?
That's yet to be questioned.
Oh, I'm getting there, Mr. Chair.
Okay.
Because this is important.
Yeah, no, we've got that all. They know that.
27 or 23% central gas.
I think they understand that.
But we have this massive drop. Germany, which has a
high renewable energy penetration, has 11 connections to
other countries but it's relying increasingly on
France, which produces about 70% of its energy by nuclear.
Increasing on Poland-
But this isn't a question. Come on, Joseph.
I'm getting there, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, well, you're taking a long time.
No.
You won't get us up.
I'm getting there. This is important, Mr. Chair.
What-
What are we doing?
What
can we realistically do, and urgently
to...
Because high power prices, we've got to reduce supply.
Supply and demand is going to go up. We need more generation, and a lot more.
Yep. Yep.
So,
prior to
2024, the New Zealand electricity system solved
largely, and solved at those 70 to 80 affordable
levels because we had a wealth of hydro storage that
worked really well, and we had an abundance of gas.
So when it stopped raining, we used the flexible cheap gas that we had.
It was six bucks a gigajoule. It was really, really cheap, and the balance of those
two products kept electricity prices really low.
2024 changed all of that. So we now do not
have those gas reserves.
supplies which is-
Is the point you are making.
One.
The first thing that we did-
... to respond to that was we entered into the Huntly Strategic
Energy Reserve to buy us time, so that gives us 10
years of flexibility,
using coal to make electricity.
How good.
So it's a stopgap measure, but the country needed it to
maintain electricity suppliesWhile we look at our
hydro reservoirs . So we are looking at it.
You got one. Okay. All right. I'm going to go quickly.
As the chair's given me one- I just quickly- So I'll go to like this If I could
just add, there's a short-term
issue, which we would say the industry has dealt with and
urgently together,
which takes us through to about 2028.
And you will have heard from others around
what they're doing around geothermal.
And similarly, we are investigating
our ability to look at existing hydro assets and see
whether we can actually bolster those
to actually add. That's a longer-term solution,
which won't happen overnight. So there's a short-term issue that
had to be solved for, and we would say we're largely there.
And then there's the longer-term one, which
everybody is working on very hard.
Okay.
No, no, no.
I want to ask about Super El Niño, but we've got to-
That's it. No. No. That's it. No, I don't. I just- Scott. Scott The last one.
Just- No, no, no. No, no, no. No. No, you took too long. Scott.
Okay. Scott. No, seriously. So, we've got to- I did say that.
So my question sort of follows on.
We've got a really clear message from the government that they want fossil
firming.
Shh.
And that's what's coming.
This week.
That's what we understand is coming.
What-
Too long
... what fossil firming are you doing at the moment?
So that's the Huntly-
Yep
... Huntly Reserve.
Yep.
That's the only fossil firming you're doing.
What are the options for you, Steve, with
LNG for firming? Is that something that is interesting you
in the future when you're getting through this tricky period?
So no, we did an analysis on effectively have we
managed dry year risk as an electricity sector, and what it shows
us is that dry year risk has been managed through the
series of agreements that we put in Huntly Strategic Reserve, the
New Zealand Aluminium Smelter demand response
agreement, and then some remaining generation sources.
So from everything that we can see, the analysis says dry year risk
has been managed through the next 10 years.
So, when we look at LNG, we go, "It's not
necessary from an electricity sector
perspective." And we're not saying the government shouldn't look at it because I
talk to the gas challenge
that's there, but that's an issue for
the government, not for the electricity sector or for
Meridian. What we're doing is, following up from Joseph's
question, is we're looking at the resources that we
have. We know that hydro reservoirs have not
been looked at or built for the last 60 years, largely because we've had
access to abundant gas. We also know that
hydro as a resource is really cheap to run.
So if we had it, it would bring... Contingent storage is an example
of the impact that it would have, but rebuilding
your hydro storage is from a country perspective, brings
long-term resilience. There's no question about it.
It just takes time to make the assessment of, is it
economically feasible for the country and for us?
So that's what we're looking at, and we know we've bought ourselves
10 years to both examine,
and then if it makes sense to feasibly build it out.
Okay. So that's really reassuring.
We've got 10 years without LNG, and I guess I'm thinking about
the options for hydro firming, not just the
access to the contingent storage.
Yep.
Could you go into a little bit of detail about what else you might be
looking at for resilience for New Zealand Inc?
Yeah. So we're looking specifically at Pukaki.
Pukaki is a
modified hydro catchment, that facility.
No one lives around
the lake. I call it a natural bathtub, and
so if you did raise it, it doesn't flood a
whole lot of surrounding land like other catchments.
So if you were going to look anywhere to expand your
hydro storage, that's the place to look, so that's
what we're doing. I don't have enough info-
No
... today to go, "Here's-"
Yeah. It's important to recognize this is early days. Yeah.
We've got a hell of- Yes ... a lot of work to do, a lot of analysis- Yeah ...
to be undertaken before we say, "That it's a happening
thing."
Yeah.
No. Under- I understand that, and I appreciate the
greatness.
Yeah.
I guess just a final question is,
we've
come through some dry years and have been managed, and
you've
taken some risk to hedge that.
Yep.
We're now entering a Super El Niño
period. What are your
predictions for how that's going to affect the hydro system?
Oh, it's really-
If we knew that, we'd absolutely coin it at the moment.
Yeah.
We would.
In the wholesale market. Great answer.
Here's the interesting thing with El Niños is El
Niño tends to bring more rain to-
Yes
... the southern hydro catchments on average.
Yeah.
La Niña is the pattern that tends to-
Yeah
... bring less.
Mm.
But the interesting thing about all predictions, Mark's point, is the
two
strongest rainfall years that we've had in the country happened during La Niña.
Mm.
So,
if you believe the forecast, there's a Super El Niño
coming.
That should be on average good for the country,
because it'll mean more rainfall.
But the reality is Mark's point, if we really knew the
answer, I-We would be pretty happy.
One thing that's worth perhaps
also mentioning in the context of resilience
is
there's a lot of renewable generation being built at the moment, and
indeed the questions we get from our, for example,
institutional investors
is around, is there a risk of overbuild?
And yes, there is a risk of overbuild.
And as a result of which, if that were to occur, then
hydro, for example,
would be used for
firming in less instances. So that storage would
be kept for longer. So
that shouldn't be disregarded as a
possibility.
Just one-
Oh, okay. One last one
... other one, then we'll go to Simon.
Thanks.
Yeah, so I'll just move to wind really quickly because you've got some wind
assets from White Hill to the north.
What is the strength? What is the value that you're seeing in that
diversity of asset base in wind in particular?
Because are you noticing that the wind blows
equally everywhere all at once, or does that
diversity give us some resilience?
The diversity gives us some resilience, but probably not as much as we
originally thought. As the first point you made, Scott, is
the wind either blows in most places
or it doesn't,
and interestingly, there's a correlation between
a dry year,
no rain, no storms, and
limited wind.
Mm.
So the actual complement that we're looking at to build out
beyond the wind farms that we've got in our pipeline, and
that currently exist, is how do we integrate solar into the system?
Because when it ain't raining-
Yeah
... the other thing that happens is the sun's out.
So solar as an asset in New Zealand actually
brings complementary base that can sit alongside
hydro and wind quite nicely as well.
Mm.
Thank you.
Simon.
I'm interested in your opinion about
the Transpower grid connection queue.
We've seen Merian make comments in the past about bureaucratic delays.
It takes two years on average from making an application
just to commencing the engineering investigation,
and that despite your intent to generation investment, the
bottleneck is access to the grid. What's your
opinion on how things are going now?
There's no question that Transpower's overwhelmed with the number of
requests for grid connection.
Mm.
They've been nothing other than supportive of any of the projects that we've
developed with them. They haven't slowed us down at all.
The next three that we're looking at really carefully and hopefully
bring to financial close
either later this calendar year or early next calendar year,
Transpower's supportive. So
we know that there's a lot of people that are bringing their muscle to
bear in New Zealand, given where wholesale prices have been.
People want to invest in generation assets and that has overwhelmed
Transpower, but they have never slowed us down.
Right.
And as I say, we don't expect them to slow us down for the
next few developments we've got either.
They're getting quicker.
Okay. Is that because your project development
timeline kind of lines up with their time frames?
I think they're getting quicker. Is there no
codependency or...
No,
when they look at their connection queue, they look at those projects that
are funded and available, ready to
go.
Mm.
And so they do... As I say, they've been a bit overwhelmed, and so they try and
prioritize their time and attention, not just on us.
We don't get special treatment. It's just that if there's a
developer that shows the intent, that has actually got
board and shareholder commitment to funders, Transpower throw their whole
support behind.
What possibly helps is that when we look at projects or when the
development team looks at projects, they will look at
substation capacity and-
Mm
... those sorts of issues and
the distance away from substations and the like.
So,
it's inherently part of the process that we'll look at,
to what extent can we help them help us?
If I put it that way.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Okay, I've got to grab a couple of questions then we're going to Megan.
Thank you.
And then to Katie. So just electricity costs around
the country now, I know having
two properties in two different places, one in Wellington, one in the Wairarapa,
the difference in price is astronomical.
It's 50% more expensive in the Wairarapa than it is in Wellington.
Yep.
And that's really ouch.
And I know the West Coast is the same.
South Island too.
There'll be a bunch of other places.
Why have we got that bigger difference, and what can we do
to bridge those kind of gaps that are for some of those regions?
And I know we've got generation about to go in in the West Coast, but
what helps to
why-
Line charges, yeah
... and what helps to deal with that?
Line charges.
So, yeah.
Sorry, we were just discussing is you
have 27 odd distribution companies around the
country, and they all charge differently.
So-
And it's the energy price that's the difference as well, not just the line charge.
The energy prices won't be that different.
Yes, they are.
The only thing that should differ, it could be that you're
on different products, because different products, if you've got a
residential property in Wellington versus a farm, you
might have a different product type, but the actual energy
price that exists in the Wairarapa won't be that
different to
Wellington for the same product.Where we see the variation,
because we have to run tariffs. We offer products to people-
So there's no distance barrier is what you're saying?
No. Yeah, no.
So
when I talked to Transpower, they said that distance is an issue from
generation. So if you're a long way from generation, if you actually had more
generation, and I use the West Coast here as an example.
Yep.
And that's why they get excited by having the new hydro scheme-
Yep
... and other opportunities there,
that it should pull prices down because that generation's close to the use.
Yes. You pay losses, so the closer you are to
generation, the lower the loss between where it's generated and where you consume.
That's what I see.
And so that does-
Yeah
... factor into your price. But beyond the losses across the HVDC
link from the South Island to the North Island, they aren't usually that
substantial portion of... Other than, as you say, the West Coast.
Because interestingly, to get electricity to the West Coast, you have to take the
transmission connection goes all the way up through Nelson
and round the top of the country, South Island, and back down the West
Coast, and so lines losses in the West Coast
are significant. And it's one of the reasons that you might or might not have
picked up, but Lightyear Solar is building a solar farm out that way, and we've
supported them by writing a 10-year PPA-
Mm
... to actually help with West Coast electricity prices.
Okay. There'll be a follow-up question on that when we do our follow-up just to get
some numbers around that. But the second area I just wanted to ask you
about is gas-
Mm
... and the use of gas. So we've been using gas for
electricity generation.
Yeah.
We've clearly got a bunch of industries who, and businesses
and households that you can transition, but it's very expensive,
and some of them can't transition at all.
How do we get ourselves in a position where we actually say we want gas to be going
to those who actually need the gas as opposed to using it for electricity
generation? What's your view on that?
Because we had Genesis last week who said,
households, businesses, electricity generation in that order.
Yep.
So the way we've historically allocated resources, gas
or electricity, has been price. That's the way that-
Well, my question is, is that the best way going forward for New Zealand Inc.?
Because
electricity generators can always pay more than the gas users can.
Yep. So we're well aware
of the challenge that we've got with physical
gas molecules and that's why
arrangements like the Huntly Strategic Energy Reserve are so important
because it means that the electricity sector uses coal,
not gas,
during a dry year.
Yeah.
Which is where the real constraint emerges.
So we are,
while that framework of price determines allocation,
we are building resources that means the electricity sector
uses less gas over time. So every wind farm we build,
every solar farm that we build means that more of the energy in the
electricity sector comes from fuel types that
mean that we don't use as much gas and more gas goes back
to other electricity consumers. So while, I don't
know
whether there's a better mechanism than price, but we get it.
Like Mark said it before
we want to grow the economy. We want people who are using gas to be
able to convert to electricity or,
if they don't have that conversion pathway, to have as lower
price gas as possible. The-
We also certainly think
and I think there might have been announcements earlier this week around
transparency in the gas market.
Mm.
It's still very opaque.
We've talked about that. It called us all out in 2024, as
a really stark example. So anything
that can be done to actually shed some
light on how gas is being used and by whom and for what,
has got to be a positive in our view.
Keep on that one. I won't ask my third question. I'll go to Megan.
So related actually, and I think that just highlights how important having a gas
transition plan for the country is.
Look, one of the things I'm interested in the comments that you've made about
LNG, you've talked about how while this is a levy on
our electricity sector, you don't see a need for it in
electricity. You think there potentially is a need for an
industrial process fee for gas users.
Have you had discussions with government around where that
levy should fall, whether it should be falling on
electricity consumers, households, and businesses as a levy on their power bill,
or whether it should be on the people who are really going to see the need and
the benefit of it?
We've been banging down as many doors as we possibly can to understand
where the decision might go on LNG.
We know there's a procurement process
underway. That's as much as we have for
now.
We don't know if that process will be completed, the procurement
process for LNG or not. We understand that it's
possibly July or August-
Yeah
... that the decision will be made, but-
So one of the things that I asked Genesis-
Probably as much as we've got
... is last week, and probably in terms of those discussions
ahead of the procurement process, have there been any
discussions about,
as a gentailer, around what
an equity stake might look like, long-term capacity
contracts, fuel off takes, what that might look like?
So we're not a fuel off-taker.
No, but in terms of a-
No
... Huntly Firming Option kind of equivalent.
No, we haven't been asked for equity.
It's just too early.
Yeah.
There's
a lot of detail to be worked
out-Even potentially
basic terms, it's just too early in the process.
Yeah. So ahead of any decisions being made,
what we have,
that you have your majority shareholder
pushing a particular position in terms of a
desire for that, have you sought
any related party risk
legal advice in terms of NZX rules, in terms
of
where that may sit in terms of the Crown as the
majority shareholder, and them having a very clear
policy position, and what that might mean if there are discussions
around offtake agreements or capacity contracts or anything like
that with the electricity sector, or has your audit and
risk committee considered this
potential problem in terms of our NZX rules?
Well, as I understand it, I'll just ask our general counsel.
We don't have any advice on that yet.
Is that something you might seek advice on?
Well, again-
Given that you've got a...
Obviously we're still waiting for decisions, but we do know that your
majority shareholder, they're occupying that
dual position of being a majority shareholder and the
policymakers in terms of any decisions at a
governance level that will need to be taken-
Should be proud
... that are commercial. Mm-hmm.
I knew somebody'd say that.
It's
just too early. Until you understand what potential
proposals look like-
Waiting for it
... or any discussion around issues like that is entirely
theoretical.
Yeah. But you-
Highly theoretical
... you would say, as a chair of a board,
that if it did come to a point where there were with the electricity
sector,
discussions around minimum offtake agreements, because we know
LNG ships aren't just going to pull up, they're going to need to have
offtake agreements. If there were any discussions with
MOM, with mixed ownership model companies, that there would
have to be some provisions put in place around related party rules.
Look, at the end of the day, our duty is to act in the interests of all
shareholders, and that's what we'll do.
Exactly.
Mm-hmm.
Yep.
Yeah. Okay. So, we'll keep asking that question about...
And it's really your shareholder needs to be thinking about how they
manage that conflict of interest.
Right. I'm going to go to Scott, Katie-
Yeah
... and then Simon. Scott.
Yeah.
Thank you. So coming back to the energy hardship question-
Oh, Christian, do you want me to-
I'm aware that you've got that program-
Yep
... to reach into homes.
No, they're just explaining.
And Genesis recently showing an interest in doing some
work in the space as well. So I'm interested in
any progress there might have been in joining forces
or putting in a general fund from
everyone, every gen tailer-
Yeah
... to have a more
equitable distribution or a more efficient distribution of
energy hardship resources to those that we know are really doing it hard at
the moment.
And if not,
is it something that we can progress?
Because that's something I would be very keen to help progress.
Yeah. Let's take away because... So the answer is not that we're aware of, Scott,
some form of general fund.
But coming back to the questions asked around generally
people struggling, we know. So we are thinking about our own commitments
as it relates to our vulnerable customer program and what we might need
to do in that space separately. But if you've got an
interest or desire, please
let us know, get in touch, and...
Okay. We-
But just looking across the market, all the gen tailers seem to be doing-
Yeah
... if I could call it that. I'm not minimizing it, but something.
We've all got initiatives underway from what I can see.
Thank you.
I get your point around-
Yeah. Okay
... how effective.
Well, we... Yeah, thank. I'll follow up. Thanks, Scott.
Katie.
Thank you. Jumping into this committee, but pleased to be here to
talk to you. Obviously I'm from...
Well, it might not be obvious to you, but I'm from Hawke's Bay.
Recently had the opening of Patupaki,
and then was just recently there representing the government for the golden row
of Te Rahui, just on the other side of the boundary.
Really pleased about your comments about the diversification because, of course, as
we've seen, if there's lots of rain, there's not a lot of sun.
There's a lot of sun, there's not a lot of rain or wind. It works well.
Just keen on your planning of battery storage, because just looking at
your renewable development pipeline, you've got a lot of wind and solar coming in,
but of course, as we know, especially with solar,
when the sun's not shining, you're not
generating.
There doesn't seem to be a good balance of battery and
solar in that pipeline. And then I've got a follow-up question just about your
community funding.
So we're really proud of the storage we've got.
We think we've got New Zealand's biggest batteries in the hydro lakes.
Mm-hmm.
Which is why we're looking at what can we do to get more from that
storage because it's so... If you can get more water, it's cheap.
Yeah, wonderful. So you think you're underutilizing the batteries as it stands.
You need more generation of it.
Where we find
batteries, you mentioned the battery energy storage systems to be
valuable is
there are times where, because the southern hydro lakes, big
batteries are in the South Island, most demand's in the North Island, is you need
those battery systems in the North Island to complement
the transmission capacity across the HVDC link.
So when we look at battery systems in the North Island,
we go, "Is there enough transmission capacity on the
HVDC to use the big batteries?" If not, at periods of time,
so if the North Island low peaks,
do we need North Island batteries?
So our battery at Ruakaka-
Yep
... is there to make sure that in those
periods where there's not enough transmission capacity that-There's energy there in
the North Island, and we actually just very recently received
consent for a second energy park. And when I say energy park,
it's a combined battery and-
Solar
... solar farm,
just out of Palmerston North.
Brilliant. I see that Manawatu plan.
Yeah.
And then my second question, if that's okay, Chair-
Yeah, yeah
... is just around your community funding.
So I know that there's the Power Up Harapaki.
But just looking into it, the fund is a greater fund around the whole country.
Do you have a commitment to making sure that that sort of is fairly allocated
around those communities? Or is it just one central pool, even though you advertise
it as a separate fund?
No, there's an allocation for each community.
Right.
So it's really...
And we become part of a community-
Yeah
... as soon as we invest for the next 30, 40 years.
And it's really important that we build a strong relationship and bring
benefit in being part of that community.
And so the community funds are a really key way of doing that.
And we bring some financial muscle, but we don't
allocate the funds. So there's a community group that have
full authority to use the funds that we will top up on an
annual basis for each of the communities where we have our generation assets.
So there's a fund for Harapaki, there's a fund for Ruakaka, there's a
fund for the Waitaki. Wherever we've got
generation, there's one here in Wellington for West Wind.
We're, to your point, we're really proud to support New Zealand's
regional communities.
Right. Thank you.
Mr. Chair.
Simon.
I asked before about access to the Transpower group.
Next question is around access to the distribution
networks around the country. I've picked up some Meridian comments,
primarily to the EA, that there's a
wide variation in the order of costs between connecting to some
networks around the country compared to others.
That the time taken to have the discussion and get the
information you need is highly variable.
Is there a risk that
deploying batteries or other
services becomes a postcode lottery, depending on
how good the local distribution lines company is at
actually getting on with it?
So
where we've provided commentary on
engagement with distribution companies-
Yeah
... for capacity on their networks has been our EV charging.
Right.
That's where we've-
Yeah. Okay
... really found that disparity in approach and cost.
I suspect it's because EV charging is new.
And so, we might be the first party to go and talk to
Ashburton Distribution company, and they may not have the
process in place to deal with EV charging.
And so for the most part, I think it's, we are
forging a new path for many of the distribution companies because we find that
when we go back for the first EV charger, it can be
time-consuming, and it can be quite different, and the cost profile can be
different from investing one in Christchurch.
But once you've educated somebody, and then they've got a
process that they put in place, the second time you go back, there's an
improvement in speed, there's an improvement in the way they think about cost.
The third time... Because you need plenty of EV chargers in the same network.
So,
I think it's more about this is a network that's being rolled out
for the first time, and so people are dealing with how
they engage with us rather than there's a massive problem-
All right
... with disparity.
Mr. Chair, supplementary on that.
Okay, you go on.
I
would've thought that if your business is running a
lines company,
that you would understand how to lay some duct and
provide a connection and what
amount of power is going to be drawn when someone plugs in a
Tesla or a BYD.
Do some of these lines companies simply not have the capacity or the knowledge or
the project management capability to be
responsive? Because it's 2026, for goodness sakes.
Good question to put to them. Yeah.
Oh, I'm interested in your opinion.
Again, you're right, they do have the capacity, they do have the knowledge to
accept connections. It's just EV charging's new.
So it is new. We're under-represented as a country for
EV charging. And so,
we find that the first time we talk to many distribution companies, they haven't
been through the process of connecting an EV charging installation.
Okay.
But as I say-
Of course, we want them to prioritize us over
everything and everybody else, but they'll have their own list of priorities.
And to be fair, we don't know what they are.
They get good at it pretty quick.
Yeah.
I'm sure they do with you educating them.
We're at our time, but Jonathan tells me that the next bit's going to
be very, very quick, so we don't need 15 minutes for it.
So if you're willing to stay for another 10, and colleagues-
We're here at your pleasure
... I'm seeing some enthusiasm for questions.
Yeah. Of course.
We will do that. So Tangi, you're next up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Look, thank you.
And I hear your comments earlier about an understanding that households
are finding it extremely difficult at the moment.
So if we look to the next three or five years, what is the cheapest form of
generation that you
can see us accessing or being able to provide?
A combination of solar and wind.
When you look at the ability to build a wind farm or a solar farm, solar farms
are quick,
but they're not as efficient in making
electricity. So,
they have
a conversion rate of about 20%. So the amount of energy coming from the sun,
20% of that is converted to electricity.
Whereas a wind farm, the capacity factor, you get the wind blowing, it's
more like 40%.
And if you look across the sector, that's where the biggest amount of investment is
going in at the moment.
I'm from the Manawa too, so I appreciate
that. But are you confident that you're doing all that you
can to tap into those opportunities?
There's no question.
We're going as fast as we possibly can.
What was holding us back,
if I just use some numbers for people, is over the last 10 years
the electricity sector's invested $12 billion in
new generation.
Over the last five, it's $6.5 billion.
We're slowed down by consenting only.
Now, the government's introduced fast-track legislation that has made a
hell of a difference.
It really has. To
just come back to the lift in costs and electricity,
driven by that structural issue that I mentioned.
We feel terrible about it,
because if we could build this new energy faster, we know the cost would've come
down quicker. So the introduction of fast-track
legislation to help us consent these assets quicker
has been
brilliant from our perspective.
I think some of us are enjoying hearing that. Okay.
We'll go for Sa. Yeah.
Okay. So just on that, and going back to my original line
of questioning. In your
internal planning and guidance that you're giving to analysts and
investors to the market. So is the
Pukaki, if that goes through, is that effect built into your
base case, EBIT and dividend forecasts, or
is it treated as an upside scenario that only applies if
the consent is granted on the terms you want?
How are you treating it in terms of your market information?
So, we would only count it if the consent is granted.
The interesting thing with contingent storage, and we've been quite
open to this, is the benefits flow to consumers.
But that's not how market analysts are treating it.
They're seeing it flow through-
No
... to EBIT and to dividends.
No. Not contingent storage. There's no material uplift to
Meridian's earnings as a result of contingent storage release.
It's the only thing that we can do as a country to increase the amount of
stored energy,
stored hydro, which then flows into price, and we can do it at the stroke of a pen.
It can be quick, and it provides relief the fastest, even though your point,
it flows through to customers based on their contract period.
But we know the alternate is you've got to build a wind farm, and it takes a couple
of years to get that wind farm in place.
Yeah. And I don't think that's the question I'm asking.
Yeah.
It's more about the benefit to Meridian versus the benefit to New
Zealand.
Yep.
And where this is going to sit in terms of your balance sheet.
We know 2024 was a terrible year for you.
Yep.
And you said it, that you hedged before it rained, and so access
to the contingent storage would do that, and I think this is coming full
circle. We need to know when is it that consumers, households, and
businesses are going to see those lower power bills rather
than it being something that can smooth out the Meridian balance
sheet-
Yep
... and be a benefit to Meridian. But we can get that kind of from you.
I think we will certainly have a follow-up question just asking for that
trajectory of what you see-
Sure
... happening with power prices going forward.
Yeah.
Possibly also going backwards as well, but also maybe profitability as well.
I think that comes in there.
Yeah. Really happy to. But just
that contingent storage release
is driven for the benefit of consumers.
Yeah. But I think the question, Mike, what we're saying is we want to know when is
it going to flow through to households and businesses-
Absolutely
... because we're seeing a three to five-year lag.
Totally.
Yeah.
Totally understand.
I'm going to give myself one. Did you have one, Scott?
Yes.
Okay, I'll give myself one, then I've got Carlos and then Scott, and you can wrap
them up, Scott. Just my one, you mentioned in hydro, the only thing you're actively
looking at in the early days yet you said was Pukaki.
I don't know if you've had any engagement with the folks Great South, but they've
got a whole electricity,
and energy strategy where I'm very impressed actually.
I don't think any other region's even close to them on that score.
But they're very interested in hydro opportunities that there are
in the southern part, the south island.
They're run of river.
Some of
which
are in your areas.
A lot of them are run of river. But I just wondered if you've been thinking about
them, and obviously you had it going back a while, the efforts on Project Aqua
in Waitaki. But are there some opportunities potentially at some
stage to say we could do more with some of those areas
where the rivers are significantly modified already? I'm not talking about Mokonui.
Yeah, okay. Well, if there's anyone out there that...
Because we're not talking to Great South.
So if there's anyone that you know of, please send them our way.
The reason we're focused on Pukaki is
the scale of support that gas provided to the new
energy system, both electricity and gas, was
massive. So for us to play a
proper role is we need to look at hydro storage and
scale hydro storage, and that's why we're focused on Pukaki, is
it's New Zealand's biggest battery already, and if we can
enlarge it in one capital project, it's better than doing it
across five smaller programs.
I hear what you're saying, yeah.
But if you've got someone-
I'll send them in your direction.
That'd be great.
They presented at the Murahuku
wānanga yesterday, and your team was there.
Right. Okay. There we go.
Yeah.
So they'll be aware. They're more than aware.
They are.
Yeah.
They've done some very impressive work.
There you go.
Carlos and then, Scott, wrap up.
Thank you.
I'm going to go to 10 past, and then we're going to flip to the next item.
Right. Very quick question. Do you believe the current electricity market
fulfill a fair paying field for smaller power company?
Yeah. Absolutely. The
wholesale market, doesn't matter who you are, whether you're big or small, is
You get paid the same amount whether you generate
a huge amount of energy or a small amount of
energy at the same node. It makes no distinction
between size. None.
But if you think they are fair, how come we heard a little feedback
from small energy retail-- small power company,
they've been mentioned that the paying field was very unfair to
them. It is much harder for them to access to the
infrastructure, the to the market.
How are you response to this?
I think you're talking about retailers rather than generators, but okay.
Yeah, both.
Yeah.
Both. Yeah.
Okay. Well, if you can answer that anyway. Level playing field.
Yeah. So, we've always felt that we treat our retail
business the same way as we treat independent retail companies,
but they haven't felt the same way.
So, the Electricity Authority adopting the level playing field
regulations are a good thing from our perspective because
they will now ensure and provide the evidence that we do that.
So, we're supportive of what the Electricity Authority has done in that
regard. We've always felt that we treat people equally, whether
you're large or small.
But those rules that have been introduced will now prove that that's the case, so
I think it's good-
It's probably worth clarifying, the EA has, to my
knowledge, has never said, "We've found an issue that needs to be
addressed," but they've put these rules in place, and so we're all in
favor of that. If there's more evidence that's required to just show there isn't an
issue, then that's great.
Okay. I'm going to go. Scott, you've probably got time for about one or maybe two
if you're lucky.
Final question.
We talked about social license, and you mentioned fast track
enabling the build, but fast track's also come up against some
areas and some problems because it's overridden social license.
So, the social license question is really about how do
we improve that? Because we know we need the massive build.
One of the proposals that's been floated for some time is the community
dividend, not just paying out, but enabling community buy
into generation to essentially purchase a turbine
or a parcel of water or
something so that over time, while it might be managed by Meridian,
the returns are regular to the community and they feel
like they are part of that generation project.
Is this something that you've been open to
and have looked at or would look at?
So we'd be open to it. What we tend to do-- So before we go through fast track or
any consenting process, we want to run an extensive program with local
community so that we understand people who support and those people that
don't support our programs, and we work with them
before we'll submit our application for consent, because we know that that actually
helps deal with a number of the issues.
We haven't run into anybody that said, "We want to buy a
turbine off you or get proceeds. You own the wind farm
or solar farm,
but we want proceeds from, say, one or energy from
one to date." But we would look at, of course.
So it might require a legislative change to make that a requirement
or...
I'm not sure it would.
No, I think we'd consider it. That's the key point.
What we've tended to do is, if we're putting it on farmland, is
we'll enter agreements with the farmers for revenue from the turbines.
But we've never had that request of, "We like that
turbine. We would like to be seen to take energy from that turbine." If
someone
came to us and said, "That's the contribution we would like as part of this
community,"
yeah, we'd be up for it.
And on that collaborative note, so thank you very much.
Thank you.
It's been great to have you here for answering all the questions.
We will send some follow-up questions, not just to you, but we send follow-up
questions to lots of organizations.
And you'll definitely get one back with the trajectories of price and profit and so
on.
Thank you.
So really appreciate that. Colleagues, thank you.